The luteal phase of the menstrual cycle starts right after ovulation. The luteal or secretory phase lasts around 14 days for most people who ovulate.

During this time frame, your uterus prepares for a possible pregnancy. If pregnancy does not occur, menstruation will take place when the luteal phase ends. Mood swings and behaviors like binge eating are common occurrences during this time frame.


The Menstrual Cycle, defining the luteal phase
Illustration by Zoe Hansen for Verywell Health
Luteal Phase Before Bleeding: What Happens?
The menstrual cycle occurs in phases. The first half of your cycle is the follicular or proliferative phase. The second half is the luteal or secretory phase. The separation between these two phases is ovulation, in which a mature egg is released from an ovary and travels down to the uterus through one of the two fallopian tubes.1

Hormone Fluctuations 
Hormonal changes regulate your monthly menstrual cycle. The hypothalamus in the brain, pituitary gland, and ovaries secrete these hormones.

During the follicular phase, gonadotropin-releasing hormone (GnRH) signals the pituitary gland to produce follicle-stimulating hormone (FSH). Estrogen and luteinizing hormone (LH) levels also start to climb. These hormones support egg maturation so that ovulation can take place.

FSH levels drop off as the egg matures and gets ready to be released. Ovulation occurs around 10 to 12 hours after LH levels peak. This is known as the LH surge.

Ovulation lasts for about a day (24 hours). However, you can get pregnant up to six days after ovulation, during the first half of the luteal phase.

The luteal phase is triggered by ovulation. During this time, a temporary cluster of cells called the corpus luteum will form on your ovary. The job of the corpus luteum is to produce progesterone, the hormone responsible for readying your uterus for pregnancy.

If pregnancy takes place, progesterone will continue to be secreted for around 10 weeks. If pregnancy does not take place, progesterone levels will decline. The lining of the uterus (endometrium) and the corpus luteum will dissipate, and your body will prepare for menstruation.

Hormonal Fluctuations and Your Menstrual Cycle
Some people have very regular periods, but others don't. Both of these schedules are common and normal.5 You can also get your period without ovulating.

Even highly predictable cycles can change. Aging, stress, fluctuations in weight, and a wide range of other issues can bring about these changes.

It's also possible to have conditions that cause hormonal disorders or fluctuations. These include luteal phase deficiency, polycystic ovary syndrome (PCOS), autoimmune conditions, and other causes.

If you're concerned about irregular periods or hormonal fluctuations, a specialist, such as a reproductive endocrinologist, can provide testing, treatment, and solutions that can help.

Physical Effects
During the luteal phase, you may experience bodily changes that are subtle or extreme. These symptoms can occur with or without conception taking place. If you're not pregnant, they're typically referred to as premenstrual syndrome (PMS).

During the luteal phase, progesterone may slow down digestion, causing bloating to occur. Other possible physical symptoms include:8

Acne breakouts
Changes in appetite and temporary weight gain
Constipation or diarrhea
Fatigue
Being gassy
Headaches
Sensitivity to light and noise
Sore, tender breasts
Emotional Effects
You may experience mood swings and other emotional issues during the luteal phase. These symptoms and feelings may be more intense if you have a condition such as premenstrual dysphoric disorder (PMDD).

Emotions that are common during the luteal phase include:

Anxiety
Depression
Irritability
Mood swings
Tension
Overeating and drinking alcohol to excess are behaviors that are sometimes associated with the emotional effects of the luteal phase. You may also have less interest in sex during this time.

Fertility Odds and Pregnancy
If a mature egg becomes fertilized by a sperm in the fallopian tube, the resulting zygote (fertilized egg) will attempt to implant in the uterus. If implantation is successful, an embryo may continue to grow.

Many factors, including the age of both partners, chromosomal issues in the fetus, and problems within the uterus, determine your odds of getting pregnant and carrying a baby to term.

Symptoms
The signs and symptoms of early pregnancy may start during the luteal phase or afterward. They include:

Food cravings
Frequent urination
Missed period
Nausea and vomiting
Tender or swollen breasts
Tiredness
How to Do Self-Care During This Phase
Your physical and emotional symptoms may make self-care challenging, but taking care of yourself during the luteal phase is important.

As always, try to get enough sleep. Emotions such as anxiety may create or worsen insomnia. Practicing good nighttime hygiene can help. Try these tips:

Avoid caffeine, nicotine, and alcohol, especially in the evening or at night.
Keep your bedroom cool and free of visible stressors like work products.
Meditate or read in a quiet room before attempting to sleep.
Take a warm bath before bed.
Turn off your phone, computer, and other electronic devices.
It can also be helpful to avoid junk food and eat healthy food that aids in digestion and supports nutrition. Luteal phase foods and healthy eating tips include:

Avoid highly processed foods.
Eat anti-inflammatory foods, like salmon.
Eat foods that are high in fiber, like fruits and vegetables.
Eat healthy fats like nuts and avocados.
Limit caffeine and alcohol.
Reduce salt intake.
Satisfy sweet cravings with fruit or dark chocolate instead of sugary desserts.
If your emotions or mood swings feel out of control, seek support from a professional, such as a healthcare provider or a therapist.

Length of Luteal Phase
The luteal phase lasts anywhere from 10 to 17 days. If you have a 28-day cycle, you can expect the luteal phase to last for around 14 to 15 days.

If you have a short luteal phase of 10 days or less, you may find it challenging to get pregnant. This is referred to as a luteal phase defect or deficiency.

Luteal phase defect results from too-low progesterone levels. If your body does not produce enough of this hormone during the luteal phase, your uterine lining won't thicken enough to support the implantation of a fertilized egg.

The exact cause of this condition is unknown. It is thought that underlying health issues may play a role. These include:14

Eating disorders, including anorexia and bulimia
Endometriosis (a condition in which tissue similar to the uterine lining grows outside of the uterus)
Extreme stress
Having obesity
Normal aging
PCOS (a hormonal disorder)
A long luteal phase is earmarked by menstruation that occurs 18 days or later after ovulation.15 This can be caused by a pregnancy that wasn't established successfully (chemical pregnancy) or by a hormonal disorder.

Tracking With Irregular Cycles 
Irregular periods are common. If you're trying to get pregnant (or avoid it), it can be challenging to track your cycle if you don't menstruate or ovulate regularly.

Ovulation predictor kits can be helpful if you get a monthly period, even if it's irregular. Some people rely on taking their basal body temperature readings. Temperature dips a day before ovulation and then rises in the luteal phase. However, this can be challenging and often lacks accuracy.

If you have irregular menstruation caused by an underlying health condition or have anovulation (inability to ovulate), you will not be able to track your cycle easily, if at all. Many conditions can cause this. Medical support may be needed to help you manage your cycles or get pregnant.

Summary
The luteal phase is the second half of the menstrual cycle. It begins with ovulation and ends with your period. You may experience many physical and emotional symptoms during this phase. These can range in severity and often include mood swings, breast changes, and appetite changes.

Underlying health conditions and hormonal disorders can affect ovulation, menstruation, and the luteal phase. If you have concerns about your hormonal health or your menstrual cycles, speak to a healthcare provider such as a reproductive endocrinologist.